okay he was the first man to climb all
14 mountains in the world over 8,000
meters it's a remarkable feat in Italian
Reinhold Messner conquered them all
without supplemental oxygen here are
some of the highlights he climbed his
first major peak in 1970 in Pakistan
nanga parbat is eight thousand 125
meters high and known as killer mountain
in 1978 he climbed Mount Everest at
8,848 metres and he later the world's
second highest mountain k2 over the next
eight years he summited on 11 more 8,000
meter plus mountains in Tibet Nepal and
also in Pakistan he completed the last
of the 14 and 1986 with an ascent of the
Lost in Nepal it's connected by a ridge
to Mount Everest and is eight thousand
five hundred and sixteen meters high
Rhino Meza joins us live now from
Kathmandu there is it all sounds very
glamorous mr. Messner exciting life of
climbing mountains but clearly it must
have had its challenges what are some of
the difficulties that you've faced from
Chapman gudid main city in Maple for me
mountaineering beginning the arts
because I born I was born in the arts I
was first a rock climber
I became especially between 25 and 40 a
high-altitude climb but it's a different
approach to the mountains there the lack
of oxygen is the main issue and
afterwards I will stay big deserts in
Africa in the Sinai desert I caused the
Antarctica I caused pain went a long way
they Gobi desert and always I was
seeking for adventure for me veneering
and also going out in the wilderness
areas is the seek for adventure ok so
what was your best climb it's very
difficult to say the most difficult and
traumatic dramatic time I had on nanga
parbat in 70 of us
quite young my last night but other day
I got hospital seat and also a few
fingers because today they are exposed
to cold and high altitude for a week
without food without the possibility to
have obtained and shelter and sleeping
bags Ebola is really a deadly situation
but I had also great the situation like
standing on k2 in a beautiful evening
helping the shadow of k2 about on my on
my feet which was maybe 20 kilometers
long because they late Sun put the
shadow on the on the geography below me
and many other of these experiences but
generally there is not a summit which is
giving us the big joy or the enthusiasm
especially they coming back from this
dangerous places which give us the
feeling that we are for what do you
think about how Mountaineers climb
mountains today compared to when you
first started doing it mountaineering is
still a classical activity but
mountaineering is becoming slowly as
pork most of the client was today they
do not go out in nature they climbed
indoor in the halls they don't go to
climb difficult mountains in Nepal low
in day out so in South America what
happened now on the 8,000 meter peak
specially on Mount Everest this is
tourism this is high class and very
expensive tourism so the shuttles are
preparing a line of fixed ropes and all
the letters and pitches on the crevasses
they prepare also the tents the camps
all suzerainty poles and the clients
they use this infrastructure to hike up
the break up Mount Everest this is not
mountaineering but this is also Kate
always missed part of our life and I
think that in the future we will have a
big
a gap between classical additional
admonition and tourism in the mountains
and on the other side sports in indoor
places or in this famous climbing
regions there young people especially
bouldering and not anymore going on big
faces pick up walls and very lastly mr.
Messner would you consider climbing
another mountain in a moment I'm here in
Nepal to do a film about the Himalayas
about the beauty of the Manas about the
human beings if the groups of people
living high up in the mountains my
respect for example for Hillary is
especially based not only on his first
ascent of Mount Everest but on his
social work I am myself doing also
social work especially in Pakistan
building schools building small clinics
for the local people so they can stay in
the mountains because slowly after
clamping 3,500 peaks all over the world
my focus is not anymore on the highest
peaks it's today on the people which are
giving to this great in my layers to the
Andes to the mountain areas of the world
history and also culture it's
fascinating to hear from you thank you
so much Reinhold Messner there in
Kathmandu for joining us